[ZIP 234] Smooth Out The Block Subsidy Issuance (#706)
zcash/zips: draft-issuance.md

```
ZIP: 
Title: Smooth Out The Block Subsidy Issuance
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits:
Status: Draft
Category: Consensus
Created: 2023-08-23
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words “MUST”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “MAY”, “RECOMMENDED”, “OPTIONAL”,
and “REQUIRED” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

"Network upgrade" - to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

“Block Subsidy” - to be interpreted as described in the Zcash Protocol Specification (TODO ZIP Editors: link from comment).

“Issuance” - the sum of Block Subsidies over time. (TODO ZIP Editors: work out if this definition is correct or can be removed).

“`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF) after the transactions
in block `h`, described in ZIP draft-zsf.md. In this ZIP, the Sustainability Fund is used to pay out Block Subsidies
from unmined ZEC, and other fund deposits.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Let `PostBlossomHalvingInterval` be as defined in [#protocol-diffadjustment]_.

```

In summary, by introducing a smoother emissions curve, we:
- maintain the economic viability of Zcash
- provide clarity on reward distribution
- take into account deposits into the ZSF
- enhance Zcash's stability as the network evolves.

# Requirements

Smoothing the issuance curve is possible using an exponential decay formula that
satisfies the following requirements:

## Issuance Requirements

1. The issuance can be summarised into a reasonably simple explanation
2. Block subsidies approximate a continuous function
3. If there are funds in the ZSF, then the block subsidy must be non-zero, preventing any final “unmined” zatoshis
4. For any 4 year period, all paid out block subsidies are approximately equal to half of the ZSF at the beginning of that 4 year period, if there are no deposits into the ZSF during those 4 years
TODO daira: add a requirement that makes the initial total issuance match the previous total issuance  
5. This functionality MUST be introduced as part of a network upgrade

# Specification

## Constants

Define constants:

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 41 / 100,000,000 or `0.00000041`

> "`NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS`" = `(365.25 * 24 * 60 * 60/75 * 4)`, or `1_683_072`
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is not needed because we define `PostBlossomBlockHalvingInterval` in [section 7.7.3](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#diffadjustment) of the protocol spec.

## Issuance Calculation

Given the block height `h` define a function **BlockSubsidy(h)**, such that:

**BlockSubsidy(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies requirements **R1** and **R2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we always round up to the next zatoshi.

`BlockSubsidy(h) = ceiling(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1))`

# Rationale

## `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`

> The value `41 / 100_000_000` satisfies the approximation:
> 
> `(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS ≈ 0.5`
> 
> Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `ZSF_BALANCE` will be paid out
> as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let `IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears` = 0.5.

The value `41 / 100_000_000` satisfies the approximation:

`(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^PostBlossomHalvingInterval ≈ IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears`

Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `ZSF_BALANCE` will be paid out
as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.
```

Reviewer 2: We're suggesting this change because the calculation represents the remaining funds, rather than the paid out funds.

## Visualization of the Smoothed Curve

> The following graph, taken from the ECC blog post, illustrates the smoothed curve. Note that depending on when the network upgrade takes place the disbursement may temporarily _increase_.

Reviewer: We want to replace this with an accurate graph.

Reviewer 3: Note: the blog post used [this repository for generating the plots](https://github.com/nathan-at-least/zec-issuance-plots).

One approach I think would be cool would be to copy that code directly into the ZIPs source and update the build system so that the plots are generated by the ZIPs build process. This way changes to the ZIP contents and the literaly plots generated could be within the scope of single PRs.

If anyone likes that approach and wants to work on it, I can chip in!

Author: @nathan-at-least I've uploaded my code here: https://github.com/eigerco/zsf-simulator

Reviewer 4: note: @tomekpiotrowski is going to work on the graph tomorrow

1. The issuance can be summarised into a reasonably simple explanation
2. Block subsidies approximate a continuous function
3. If there are funds in the ZSF, then the block subsidy must be non-zero, preventing any final “unmined” zatoshis
4. For any 4 year period, all paid out block subsidies are approximately equal to half of the ZSF at the beginning of that 4 year period, if there are no deposits into the ZSF during those 4 years
TODO daira: add a requirement that makes the initial total issuance match the previous total issuance  
5. This functionality MUST be introduced as part of a network upgrade

# Specification

## Constants

Define constants:

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 41 / 100,000,000 or `0.00000041`

"`NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS`" = `(365.25 * 24 * 60 * 60/75 * 4)`, or `1_683_072`

## Issuance Calculation

Given the block height `h` define a function **BlockSubsidy(h)**, such that:

**BlockSubsidy(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies requirements **R1** and **R2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

> Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we need to always round up to at least 1 Zatoshi
> if `ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1) > 0`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we always round up to the next zatoshi.
```

> `BlockSubsidy(h) = ceiling(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1))`

Reviewer 5: After the `Issuance Calculation` section, the specification needs a section where it specifies how this is intended to be "connected" to the previous issuance mechanism. This is important because it defines the shape of the issuance curve at the transition (in the currently-included image this is a jump upwards).

There will be some block height (that should be a constant in this specification section with either a known value or undefined for now) at which this issuance mechanism will first be applied, but that does not necessarily need to coincide with the network upgrade activation height (so e.g. if this were deployed in a NU that activated at height `X`, the height at which the issuance switches from the old to the new mechanism can be any height `Y >= X`).

There should also be a section in the Rationale explaining why the (to-be-specified) choice was made.

Reviewer 4: @nathan-at-least This is what we spoke about on our recent call - can you weigh in here?

Reviewer 4: @str4d I believe I've now addressed this in my latest commit(s) based on the discussion on the Oct 5 Arborist call - can you confirm?

# Rationale

## `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`

Let `IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears` = 0.5.

The value `41 / 100_000_000` satisfies the approximation:

`(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^PostBlossomHalvingInterval ≈ IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears`

Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `ZSF_BALANCE` will be paid out
as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.

## Visualization of the Smoothed Curve

The following graph, taken from the ECC blog post, illustrates the smoothed curve. Note that depending on when the network upgrade takes place the disbursement may temporarily _increase_.

![A graph showing a comparison of the halving-based step function vs the smoothed curve](./draft-zip-smoothed-issuance-curve.png)

## Other Notes

The suggested implementation avoids using float numbers. Rust and C++ will both round
the result of the final division up, satisfying **R3** above.

# Appendix: Simulation

We encourage readers to run the following Rust code, which simulates block subsidies.
According to this simulation, assuming no deflationary action, block subsidies would
last for approximately 113 years:

## Rust Code

```rust
fn main() {

>     // approximate available subsidies in August of 2023

Reviewer: I would give a block height so that this can be exact.

Reviewer 4: @tomekpiotrowski Can you update this Rust code to use block `2726400`

    let mut available_subsidies: i64 = 4671731 * 100_000_000;
    let mut block: u32 = 0;

    while available_subsidies > 0 { 
        let block_subsidy = (available_subsidies * 41 + 99_999_999) / 100_000_000;
        available_subsidies -= block_subsidy;

        println!(
            "{} ({} years): {}({} ZEC) {}({} ZEC)",
            block,                             // current block
            block / 420_768,                   // ~ current year
            block_subsidy,                     // block subsidy in zatoshis
            block_subsidy / 100_000_000,       // block subsidy in ZEC
            available_subsidies,               // available subsidies in zatoshis
            available_subsidies / 100_000_000  // available subsidies in ZEC
        );

        block += 1;
    }   
}
```

Last line of output of the above program is:

`47699804 (113 years): 1(0 ZEC) 0(0 ZEC)`

Note the addition of 99,999,999 before division to force rounding up of non-zero values.

# References

[1] RFC-2119: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119

[2] ZIP-200: https://zips.z.cash/zip-0200

> [3] ZIP-XXX: Placeholder for the ZSF ZIP

Reviewer: This also needs `[#protocol-diffadjustment]`.

Reviewer 4: @daira is that a note for the ZIP owners? If so, could you clarify? Do I just need to add the anchor to the URL?

Category: Consensus
Created: 2023-08-23
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words “MUST”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “MAY”, “RECOMMENDED”, “OPTIONAL”,
and “REQUIRED” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

"Network upgrade" - to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

“Block Subsidy” - to be interpreted as described in the Zcash Protocol Specification (TODO ZIP Editors: link from comment).

“Issuance” - the sum of Block Subsidies over time. (TODO ZIP Editors: work out if this definition is correct or can be removed).

“`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF) after the transactions
in block `h`, described in ZIP draft-zsf.md. In this ZIP, the Sustainability Fund is used to pay out Block Subsidies
from unmined ZEC, and other fund deposits.

# Abstract

This ZIP proposes a change to how nodes calculate the block subsidy.

Instead of following a step function around the 4-year halving intervals inherited
from Bitcoin, we propose a slow exponential “smoothing” of the curve. The new issuance
scheme would approximate the current issuance over 4-year intervals, and results in the last

> zatoshi being issued in around 114 years.

Reviewer: The last part can't be predicted and isn't needed:
* deposits into the ZSF aren't predictable;
* the consensus rules will almost certainly change again in the next 114 years;
* it's not meaningful without a comparison to the current "time to last zatoshi";
* it's not really that important anyway.

# Motivation

> The current Zcash economic model, inherited from Bitcoin, includes a halving mechanism which dictates the issuance of new coins. While this has been foundational, halvings can lead to abrupt changes in the rate of new coins being introduced to the market. Such sudden shifts can potentially disrupt the network's economic model, potentially impacting its security and stability.

Reviewer 3: I have a few suggested edits for the motivation which focus on the benefit of "recycling" ZSF deposits into future disbursements. Here is the first:

```suggestion
The current Zcash economic model, inherited from Bitcoin, includes a halving mechanism which dictates the issuance of new coins. While this has been foundational, halvings can lead to abrupt changes in the rate of new coins being introduced to the market. Such sudden shifts can potentially disrupt the network's economic model, potentially impacting its security and stability. Furthermore, the halvings schedule is fixed and does not provide any way to "recycle" funds into future issuance.
```

> To address this, we propose smoothing out the issuance curve of ZEC, ensuring a more consistent and predictable rate of coin issuance, while still preserving the overall supply cap of 21,000,000 coins. This modification does not seek to change the core aspects of Zcash's issuance policy. Instead, it solely aims to enhance predictability and avoid sudden changes. By making this shift, the average block subsidy over time will remain consistent, and the funds for block subsidies will be available for a similar duration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To address this, we propose issuing a fixed portion of the pending funds-to-be-issued in each block. This has the effect of smoothing out the issuance curve of ZEC, ensuring a more consistent and predictable rate of coin issuance, while still preserving the overall supply cap of 21,000,000 coins. This mechanism by itself (without other anticipated changes) seeks to preserve the core aspects of Zcash's issuance policy and aims to enhance predictability and avoid sudden changes. By making this shift, the average block subsidy over time will remain predictable with very gradual changes.

However, we anticipate schemes proposed in [#draft-zsf]_ where the amount of funds-to-be-issued may increase. In that scenario, this issuance mechanism would distribute that increase starting in the immediately following block and subsequent blocks. Because this distribution mechanism has an exponential decay, such increases will be spread out in miniscule amounts to future blocks over a long time period. This issuance mechanism thus provides a way for potential increases or decreases of issuance while constraining those changes to be small on a short time scale to avoid unexpected disruptions. 
```

> Additionally, the current Bitcoin-style issuance does not take into account the current balance of `ZsfBalanceAfter(h)` where the new smoothed issuance curve would. If the issuance curve were to never be implemeneted, this creates the risk of funds never being disbursed after they are deposited back into the ZSF. Rather than adding complexity, the smoothed model satisfies this requirement with a simpler implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the current Bitcoin-style issuance does not take into account the current balance of `ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`. If [#draft-zsf]_ were to activate without a change to the issuance mechanism, then some funds would never be disbursed after they are deposited back into the ZSF.
```

In summary, by introducing a smoother emissions curve, we:
- maintain the economic viability of Zcash

> - provide clarity on reward distribution

Reviewer: This doesn't connect to anything else in the Motivation. Also, the current reward distribution is clear. It's just any additional funds deposited into the ZSF that have unclear distribution.

Reviewer 4: Thanks - fixed (I think) by combining this with the next bullet point

> - provide clarity on reward distribution

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- provide predictability of the issuance rate, allowing only miniscule changes over short time ranges
```

Reviewer 4: Made this change manually since the diff was outdated

Reviewer 4: @nathan-at-least might you be able to resolve this so that the "changes requested" is cleared?

- take into account deposits into the ZSF
- enhance Zcash's stability as the network evolves.

# Requirements

Smoothing the issuance curve is possible using an exponential decay formula that
satisfies the following requirements:

## Issuance Requirements

1. The issuance can be summarised into a reasonably simple explanation

> 2. Block subsidies approximate a continuous function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Block subsidies approximate a continuous function, and over any short time range changes to the per-block issuance rate are miniscule which avoids disrupting people's expectations or plans
```

3. If there are funds in the ZSF, then the block subsidy must be non-zero, preventing any final “unmined” zatoshis
4. For any 4 year period, all paid out block subsidies are approximately equal to half of the ZSF at the beginning of that 4 year period, if there are no deposits into the ZSF during those 4 years
TODO daira: add a requirement that makes the initial total issuance match the previous total issuance  
5. This functionality MUST be introduced as part of a network upgrade

# Specification

## Constants

Define constants:

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 41 / 100,000,000 or `0.00000041`

"`NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS`" = `(365.25 * 24 * 60 * 60/75 * 4)`, or `1_683_072`

## Issuance Calculation

Given the block height `h` define a function **BlockSubsidy(h)**, such that:

**BlockSubsidy(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies requirements **R1** and **R2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

> Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we need to always round up to at least 1 Zatoshi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we always round up to at least 1 Zatoshi
```

```

# Terminology

The key words “MUST”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “MAY”, “RECOMMENDED”, “OPTIONAL”,
and “REQUIRED” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

"Network upgrade" - to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

“Block Subsidy” - to be interpreted as described in the Zcash Protocol Specification (TODO ZIP Editors: link from comment).

“Issuance” - the sum of Block Subsidies over time. (TODO ZIP Editors: work out if this definition is correct or can be removed).

“`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF) after the transactions
in block `h`, described in ZIP draft-zsf.md. In this ZIP, the Sustainability Fund is used to pay out Block Subsidies
from unmined ZEC, and other fund deposits.

Let `PostBlossomHalvingInterval` be as defined in [#protocol-diffadjustment]_.

# Abstract

This ZIP proposes a change to how nodes calculate the block subsidy.

Instead of following a step function around the 4-year halving intervals inherited
from Bitcoin, we propose a slow exponential “smoothing” of the curve. The new issuance
scheme would approximate the current issuance over 4-year intervals.

> 

Reviewer 2: In the abstract, it would be helpful to say that this ZIP depends on https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/703

(This is already implied, but it helps to be specific.)

Author: done

TODO daira: add a requirement that makes the initial total issuance match the previous total issuance  
5. This functionality MUST be introduced as part of a network upgrade

# Specification

## Goals

We want to decrease the short-term impact of the deployment of this ZIP on block reward recipients, and minimise the potential reputational risk to Zcash of changing the block reward amount.

## Constants

Define constants:

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 4126 / 10,000,000,000 or `0.0000004126`

"`DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`" = 2726400

## Issuance Calculation

At the `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`, nodes should switch from the current issuance calculation, to the following:

Given the block height `h` define a function **BlockSubsidy(h)**, such that:

**BlockSubsidy(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies requirements **R1** and **R2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we always round up to the next zatoshi.

`BlockSubsidy(h) = ceiling(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1))`

## Deployment

> TBD

Reviewer 2: Please say that this ZIP needs to be deployed at the same time or after:
https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/703

Author: done

```

> ZIP: 

Reviewer 5: Assigned ZIP 234.

Title: Smooth Out The Block Subsidy Issuance
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits: Nathan Wilcox
         Mark Henderson
         Jason McGee
Status: Draft
Category: Consensus
Created: 2023-08-23
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words “MUST”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “MAY”, “RECOMMENDED”, “OPTIONAL”,
and “REQUIRED” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

"Network upgrade" - to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

“Block Subsidy” - the algorithmic issuance of ZEC on block creation – part of
the consensus rules. Split between the miner and the Dev Fund. Also known as Block Reward.

“Issuance” - The method by which unmined or unissued ZEC is converted to ZEC available

> to users of the network

Reviewer 2: These definitions are repeated in PRs #703 and #718, please define the terms in the first ZIP #703, then reference them from the other ZIPs.

I suggest using moving these definitions to #703, because they are correct. The definitions in the other PRs are slightly different in a way that makes them incorrect.

Reviewer 4: These now reference the ZIP in #703

```
ZIP: 
Title: Smooth Out The Block Subsidy Issuance
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits: Nathan Wilcox
         Mark Henderson
         Jason McGee
Status: Draft
Category: Consensus
Created: 2023-08-23
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words “MUST”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “MAY”, “RECOMMENDED”, “OPTIONAL”,
and “REQUIRED” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

"Network upgrade" - to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

“Block Subsidy” - the algorithmic issuance of ZEC on block creation – part of
the consensus rules. Split between the miner and the Dev Fund. Also known as Block Reward.

“Issuance” - The method by which unmined or unissued ZEC is converted to ZEC available
to users of the network

“We” - the ZIP authors, owners listed in the above front matter

> “`ZSF_BALANCE(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF),
> described in ZIP #TODO#. This is used to pay out Block Subsidies from at block height
> `h`, ie. “not yet mined ZEC at h”.
> 
> “`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 41 / 100,000,000 or `0.00000041`
> 
> "`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`" is the total ZEC available in the ZSF _after_ the calculation
> involving the `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION` is applied.

Reviewer 2: I think this ZIP is going to be less confusing if it consistently uses `ZsfBalanceAfter(h)` (the function).

It isn't necessary to reference the node state `ZSF_BALANCE` (note the difference in capitalisation) in this ZIP, because it is defined in terms of the function in the other ZIP. (And we might remove or rename it in that ZIP.)

Other fixes:
2. There's an off-by-one error here, it's actually the balance after `h-1` that's used to pay out the subsidy in the next block. But that is too specific for the definitions, so it doesn't need to be repeated here.
3. The ZSF includes deposits.
4. "_after_ the calculation involving the `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION` is applied" is ambiguous, and repeats what is specified later in the ZIP. (So it isn't needed here.)

```suggestion
“`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF) after the transactions
in block `h`, described in ZIP #TODO reference#. The Sustainability Fund is used to pay out Block Subsidies
from unmined ZEC, and other fund deposits.

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 41 / 100,000,000 or `0.00000041`
```

Instead of following a step function around the four-year halving cycle inherited
from Bitcoin, we propose a slow exponential “smoothing” of the curve. The new issuance
scheme would approximate the current 4 year cycle, and results in the last

> zatoshi being spent in around 113 years.

Reviewer: Let's also include a graph. I can create one using pyplot/matplotlib.

> zatoshi being spent in around 113 years.

Reviewer 2: That's a great idea, I was trying to draw one freehand on paper yesterday, but exponential curves are tough to eyeball.

> zatoshi being spent in around 113 years.

Reviewer 4: There's now a placeholder for the graph. @daira are you still willing/able to create a comparison graph modeling the issuance change starting at block `2726400`?

> zatoshi being spent in around 113 years.

Reviewer 4: @daira, @tomekpiotrowski said he would create the graph tomorrow

> zatoshi being spent in around 113 years.

Author: @daira @teor2345 I've added two graphs now. One that compares smooth and halving-based issuance and one for ZSF balance.

and consistency of the block subsidy issuance process.

Smoothing the emissions curve helps ensure that the network remains economically
viable and stable as it transitions from a traditional issuance mechanism to one
that maintains a sustainable and predictable issuance of rewards over time. It
prevents abrupt changes in the rate of newly issued coins, which could lead to
disruptions in the network's economic model and potentially impact its security
and sustainability. A smoother emissions curve allows for a more gradual and controlled
transition, providing ZEC stakeholders and participants with a clear understanding of
how rewards will be distributed over time.

# Specification

Smoothing the issuance curve is possible using an exponential decay formula that
satisfies the following requirements:

## Requirements

1. Block subsidies MUST be weakly decreasing
2. Block subsidies SHOULD approximate a continuous function
3. When `AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES(h) > 0` then block subsidies for block `h`
MUST always be `> 0`, preventing a final “unmined” zatoshi
4. For any 4 year period, all paid out block subsidies MUST equal approximately

> half of `AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES` at the beginning of that 4 year period

Reviewer 2: This suggestion needs to be re-applied, because the current text contains an off-by-one error. It also references a definition I suggested removing earlier:
https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/706/files#r1330645529

5. This functionality MUST be introduced as part of a network upgrade

The above requirements assume no deflationary action, i.e. that no ZEC is added

> to `AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES`. They are referenced below as **Rn**.

Reviewer 2: This incompatibility has not been resolved in the current ZIP text.

## Solution

Given the block height `h` define a function **S**, such that:

**S(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Please note that

`AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES(h+1) = AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES(h) - S(h)` assuming no deflationary action.

An exponential decay function **S** satisfies **R1** and **R2** above:

`S(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES(h)`

Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we need to always round up to at least 1 Zatoshi
if `AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES(h) > 0`:

`S(h) = ROUND_UP(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES(h))`

# Rationale

## `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`

> That value of `41 / 100_000_000` was selected so that it satisfies the equation:

Reviewer 2: It might be worth mentioning that `41 / 100_000_000` is 3.1% more than the target issuance rate:
```sh
$ python3 -c 'print((1 - 41/100000000.)**(420768*4))'
0.5015461452386029
```

Reviewer 2: Sorry I had the wrong calculation for the rate difference, it is actually 0.31% less than the target.

If you'd like to make that difference even smaller, some possible fractions and their variance percentages are:
```
$ python3
>>> (1 - ((1 - 410/1000000000.)**(420768*4)) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
-0.3092290477205717
>>> (1 - ((1 - 411/1000000000.)**(420768*4)) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
-0.1405433047117155
>>> (1 - ((1 - 412/1000000000.)**(420768*4)) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
0.02785874818078682
>>> (1 - ((1 - 4118/10000000000.)**(420768*4)) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
-0.005798995334638235
>>> (1 - ((1 - 4119/10000000000.)**(420768*4)) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
0.011031292633090217
```

Feel free to keep it as it is, or choose one of these fractions instead.

(We can't go any higher than a 4-digit multiplier, because it could overflow a 63 bit integer if all funds are deposited back into the ZSF. It's unlikely, but we have to think about these things!)

Reviewer 2: These calculations are outdated, they need to be updated to use `PostBlossomHalvingInterval`. This might change some of the constants with larger divisors. (The current constant in the spec is still the closest for that divisor, but it's around 0.45% lower issuance.)

Reviewer 2: @aphelionz @nathan-at-least & jason: do any of the authors want the issuance to be closer to the current issuance? -0.436% is not that much of a difference, but we can make it 100x smaller if you want.

Here is the issuance difference of -0.436% for the current `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`, and two alternative fractions that would give -0.015% and +0.002% issuance differences.

```python
>>> (1 - ((1 - 41/100000000.)**1680000) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
-0.435650152033773
>>> (1 - ((1 - 4125/10000000000.)**1680000) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
-0.014704836099199703
>>> (1 - ((1 - 4126/10000000000.)**1680000) - 0.5)/0.5 * 100
0.002096231305492857
```

(Feel free to tag Jason in the comments, I couldn't find his GitHub handle.)

Reviewer 4: `4126/10000000000.` is an interesting one. If that's the absolute closest perhaps we could use that one. I'm flexible tbh.

Reviewer 2: `4126/10000000000` is the closest power-of-10 fraction that achieves the requirements, and is technically reasonable.

Almost all programming languages have 64 bit data types, and some codebases use signed types for amounts, so the number of bits available for this calculation is 63. (Some languages and platforms have 128-bit types, but some don't.)

Here is a rationale for limiting the numerator that can go in the ZIP:

The largest possible amount in the ZSF is `MAX_MONEY`, in the theoretically possible case that all issued funds are deposited back into the ZSF. If this happened, the largest interim sum in the block subsidy calculation would be `MAX_MONEY * 4126 + 10000000000`.

This uses `62.91` bits, which is just under the 63 bit limit for signed 64-bit integer amount types.

The numerator could be brought closer to the limit by using a larger denominator, but the difference in the amount issued would be very small. So we chose a power-of-10 denominator for simplicity.

Reviewer 3: Personal opinion: deltas that small are fine because the whole success of the ZSF is predicated on integrating a large enough volume of deposits that the balance remains steady (or grows) over a given time period. So if the actual issuance rate is a tiny delta from current issuance rate, that would be completely outweighed by deposits.

If, OTOH, deposits are so small that this tiny rate difference matters, then the network is failing to find long term sustainability, so IMO the delta doesn't matter in that case, because the Big Picture is a much worse problem.

Reviewer 2: This is a useful goal and rationale for a small delta over the long term. If you decide to accept a small delta, please put them in the ZIP. However, there could be short-term impacts: if you think those impacts are small, please say that as well.

Here is a potential alternative goal and rationale for a minimal delta over the short term. It doesn't conflict with your rationale over the long term, because it is focused on the short-term impact, rather than the long-term impact.

Goal section:

We want to decrease the short-term impact of the deployment of this ZIP on block reward recipients, and minimise the potential reputational risk to Zcash of changing the block reward amount.

Rationale section:

The chosen `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION` changes the block rewards by `+0.002%` over the 4 years after the ZIP activates, which is equivalent to (TODO: 0.XX ZEC per day). This is the smallest change in block rewards we can achieve within technical limitations.

Reviewer 4: Updated the fraction to `4126 / 100_000_000` @tomekpiotrowski please take note

Reviewer 2: Just a note for anyone reading this, the fraction is `4126/10_000_000_000`.

Reviewer 2: This rationale needs to be included in the ZIP, because it justifies that the ZIP is implementable:

> Here is a rationale for limiting the numerator that can go in the ZIP:
> 
> The largest possible amount in the ZSF is `MAX_MONEY`, in the theoretically possible case that all issued funds are deposited back into the ZSF. If this happened, the largest interim sum in the block subsidy calculation would be `MAX_MONEY * 4126 + 10000000000`.
> 
> This uses `62.91` bits, which is just under the 63 bit limit for signed 64-bit integer amount types.
> 
> The numerator could be brought closer to the limit by using a larger denominator, but the difference in the amount issued would be very small. So we chose a power-of-10 denominator for simplicity.

Author: I've added it :+1:

> `(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS ≈ 0.5`

Reviewer 2: Can you add a definition for NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS?

Reviewer 4: Fixed, added 👍

Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `AVAILABLE_SUBSIDIES` will be paid out
as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.

## Other Notes

The suggested implementation avoids using float numbers. Rust and C++ will both round
the result of the final division up, satisfying **R3** above.

# Appendix: Simulation

We encourage readers to run the following Rust code, which simulates block subsidies.
According to this simulation, assuming no deflationary action, block subsidies would

> last for approximately 113 years:

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: It is 113.9 years from August 2023.

[This Rust code](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=f8f50d0883b20b677b43f62be49f2377) gives me the final lines:
```sh
$ cargo run --release | tail 
   Compiling zec-smooth-issuance v0.1.0 (/Users/mail/zec-smooth-issuance)
    Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 0.80s
     Running `target/release/zec-smooth-issuance`
47921512 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 9(9.0e-8 ZEC)
47921513 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 8(8.0e-8 ZEC)
47921514 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 7(7.0e-8 ZEC)
47921515 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 6(6.0e-8 ZEC)
47921516 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 5(5.0e-8 ZEC)
47921517 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 4(4.0e-8 ZEC)
47921518 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 3(3.0e-8 ZEC)
47921519 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 2(2.0e-8 ZEC)
47921520 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 1(1.0e-8 ZEC)
47921521 (113.9 years): 1(1.0e-8 ZEC) 0(0.0e0 ZEC)
```

```suggestion
last for approximately 114 years from August 2023:
```

```
ZIP: 
Title: Smooth Out The Block Subsidy Issuance
Owners: Jason McGee <jason@shieldedlabs.com>
        Mark Henderson <mark@equilibrium.co>
        Tomek Piotrowski <tomek@eiger.co>
        Mariusz Pilarek <mariusz@eiger.co>
Original-Authors: Nathan Wilcox
Credits: Nathan Wilcox
         Mark Henderson
         Jason McGee
Status: Draft
Category: Consensus
Created: 2023-08-23
License: BSD-2-Clause
```

# Terminology

The key words “MUST”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “MAY”, “RECOMMENDED”, “OPTIONAL”,
and “REQUIRED” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]

"Network upgrade" - to be interpreted as described in ZIP 200. [2]

> “Block Subsidy” - to be interpreted as described in ZIP TBD [3]
> 
> “Issuance” - to be interpreted as described in ZIP TBD [3]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
“Block Subsidy” - to be interpreted as described in the Zcash Protocol Specification (TODO ZIP Editors: link from comment).

“Issuance” - the sum of Block Subsidies over time. (TODO ZIP Editors: work out if this definition is correct or can be removed).
```

> “We” - the ZIP authors, owners listed in the above front matter
> 

Reviewer 2: This is a prose style rather than a technical term, it doesn't need to be defined. (Also in the other ZIPs.)

```suggestion
```

> “`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF) after the transactions
> in block `h`, described in ZIP #TODO reference#. The Sustainability Fund is used to pay out Block Subsidies
> from unmined ZEC, and other fund deposits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
“`ZsfBalanceAfter(h)`” is the total ZEC available in the Zcash Sustainability Fund (ZSF) after the transactions
in block `h`, described in ZIP draft-zsf.md. In this ZIP, the Sustainability Fund is used to pay out Block Subsidies
from unmined ZEC, and other fund deposits.
```

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 41 / 100,000,000 or `0.00000041`

> "`NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS_IN_4_YEARS`" = `(365.25 * 24 * 60 * 60/75 * 4)`, or `1_683_072`

Reviewer 2: Structure: move these into a Constants section in the specification section.

Reviewer 4: Fixed 👍

# Abstract

This ZIP proposes a change to how nodes calculate the block subsidy.

> Instead of following a step function around the four-year halving cycle inherited
> from Bitcoin, we propose a slow exponential “smoothing” of the curve. The new issuance
> scheme would approximate the current 4 year cycle, and results in the last
> zatoshi being issued in around 114 years.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: there is no cycle after this ZIP, it's a smooth curve. And they are currently called "halving intervals".

```suggestion
Instead of following a step function around the 4-year halving intervals inherited
from Bitcoin, we propose a slow exponential “smoothing” of the curve. The new issuance
scheme would approximate the current issuance over 4-year intervals, and results in the last
zatoshi being issued in around 114 years.
```

subsidy issuance mechanism in the Zcash network. The primary goal of this proposal is to
introduce a more predictable and stable issuance of ZEC by smoothing out the issuance
curve while preserving the supply cap. It's important to note that this proposal does
not seek to alter the fundamental aspects of Zcash's issuance policy. The average block
subsidy amount over time will remain the same and the funds for block subsidies will last
a similar amount of time. Instead, it focuses solely on enhancing the predictability
and consistency of the block subsidy issuance process.

Smoothing the emissions curve helps ensure that the network remains economically
viable and stable as it transitions from a traditional issuance mechanism to one
that maintains a sustainable and predictable issuance of rewards over time. It
prevents abrupt changes in the rate of newly issued coins, which could lead to
disruptions in the network's economic model and potentially impact its security
and sustainability. A smoother emissions curve allows for a more gradual and controlled
transition, providing ZEC stakeholders and participants with a clear understanding of

> how rewards will be distributed over time.

Reviewer 2: We think that the key points of these paragraphs are:
- "abrupt changes in the rate of newly issued coins"
- "a [smooth] issuance of ZEC by smoothing out the issuance curve while preserving the supply cap"
- " does not seek to alter the fundamental aspects of Zcash's issuance policy"

We think the motivation will be clearer if the information is presented in this order, and the impact of halvings on the Zcash market is specifically described. To make it easier for the reader to identify these points, we would encourage you to remove verbose wording and buzzwords.

> # Specification
> 
> Smoothing the issuance curve is possible using an exponential decay formula that
> satisfies the following requirements:
> 
> ## Issuance Goals
> 
> 1. Block subsidies are monotonically decreasing, as long as `ZsfBalanceAfter(h)` is monotonically decreasing
> 2. Block subsidies approximate a continuous function
> 3. When `ZSF_BALANCE(h) > 0` then block subsidies for block `h`
> MUST always be `> 0`, preventing a final “unmined” zatoshi
> 4. For any 4 year period, all paid out block subsidies MUST equal approximately
> half of `ZSF_BALANCE` at the beginning of that 4 year period

Reviewer 2: We think it is possible to simplify these requirements, because they are not a strict specification.

The old requirement 1 is redundant, because it is implied by the old requirements 2 and 4.

(Apologies for my original suggestion here, the ZIP Editors have decided that these are best described as requirements. See ZIP-244 for an example.)

```suggestion
# Requirements

Smoothing the issuance curve is possible using an exponential decay formula that
satisfies the following requirements:

## Issuance Requirements

1. The issuance can be summarised into a reasonably simple explanation
2. Block subsidies approximate a continuous function
3. If there are funds in the ZSF, then the block subsidy must be non-zero, preventing any final “unmined” zatoshis
4. For any 4 year period, all paid out block subsidies are approximately equal to half of the ZSF at the beginning of that 4 year period, if there are no deposits into the ZSF during those 4 years
TODO daira: add a requirement that makes the initial total issuance match the previous total issuance  
```

5. This functionality MUST be introduced as part of a network upgrade

> The above requirements assume no deflationary action, i.e. that no ZEC is added
> to `ZSF_BALANCE`. They are referenced below as **Rn**.

Reviewer 2: This has been moved into the specific requirements where it is relevant.

```suggestion
They are referenced below as **Rn**.
```

> ## Issuance Calculation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Specification

## Issuance Calculation
```

Given the block height `h` define a function **S**, such that:

**S(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies **G1** and **G2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

Finally, to satisfy **G3** above we need to always round up to at least 1 Zatoshi
if `ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1) > 0`:

> `BlockSubsidy(h) = ceiling(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1))`

Reviewer 6: This is a bit confusing - is `S(h)` the same as `BlockSubsidy(h)`?

My suggestion is to first define the "final" `BlockSubsidy(h)` and then explain why it satisfies the requirements, for clarity.

Reviewer 4: Fixed by simply renaming the instances of `S(h)` to `BlockSubsidy(h)` but still keeping the incremental composition of the function

> ## Deployment

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Deployment
```

> The implementation of this ZIP MUST be deployed at the same time or after the Zcash Sustainability Fund is established.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: this will need to reference a specific ZIP, because there are multiple ZIPs relating to the ZSF. It's enough to make this change for now:

```suggestion
The implementation of this ZIP MUST be deployed at the same time or after the Zcash Sustainability Fund is established (ZIP-XXX).
```

## `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`

Let `IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears` = 0.5.

The value `4126 / 10_000_000_000` satisfies the approximation within +0.002%:

`(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^PostBlossomHalvingInterval ≈ IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears`

Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `ZSF_BALANCE` will be paid out
as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.

The largest possible amount in the ZSF is MAX_MONEY, in the theoretically possible case that all issued funds are deposited back into the ZSF. If this happened, the largest interim sum in the block subsidy calculation would be MAX_MONEY * 4126 + 10000000000.

> This uses 62.91 bits, which is just under the 63 bit limit for signed 64-bit integer amount types.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This uses 62.91 bits, which is just under the 63 bit limit for 64-bit signed two's-complement integer amount types.
```

## Visualization of the Smoothed Curve

The following graph illustrates compares issuance for the current halving-based step function vs the smoothed curve.

![A graph showing a comparison of the halving-based step function vs the smoothed curve](./zsf_block_subsidy.png)

The graph below shows the balance of the ZSF assuming smooth issuance is implemented.

![A graph showing the balance of the ZSF assuming smooth issuance is implemented](./zsf_balance.png)

# Appendix: Simulation

The [ZSF simulator](https://github.com/eigerco/zsf-simulator) allows us to simulate the effects of this ZIP on the ZSF balance and the block subsidy, as well as generate plots like the ones above. Its output:

```
Last block is 47917869 in ~113.88 years
```

indicates that, assuming no ZEC is ever deposited to the ZSF, its balance will be depleted after 113.88 years, and the block subsidy will be 0 ZEC after that point.

This fragment of the output 

```
Halving  1 at block  1680000:
  ZSF subsidies:    262523884819889 (~ 2625238.848 ZEC,        1.563 ZEC per block)
  legacy subsidies: 262500000000000 (~ 2625000.000 ZEC,        1.562 ZEC per block)

>   difference:           23884819889 (~         238 ZEC),         ZSF/legacy: 1.0001

Reviewer 5: Action item: @daira to check these.

"`DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`" = 2726400

## Issuance Calculation

At the `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`, nodes should switch from the current issuance calculation, to the following:

Given the block height `h` define a function **BlockSubsidy(h)**, such that:

**BlockSubsidy(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies requirements **R1** and **R2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we always round up to the next zatoshi.

`BlockSubsidy(h) = ceiling(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1))`

## Deployment

# Rationale

## `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`

Let `IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears` = 0.5.

The value `41 / 100_000_000` satisfies the approximation:

`(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^PostBlossomHalvingInterval ≈ IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears`

Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `ZSF_BALANCE` will be paid out
as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.

## `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`

The deployment should happen at the next halving, which is block `2726400`.

> Since there is a planned halving at this point, there will already be a significant "shock" caused by the drop in issuance caused by the halving. This reduces surprise and thus increases security. Also, due to the nature of the smoothed curve having a portion of the curve above the respective step function line at times, this will maximally _reduce_ the issuance shock at the `TARGET_BLOCK_HEIGHT`.

Reviewer 2: It looks like `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT` and `TARGET_BLOCK_HEIGHT` might be the same constant.

```suggestion
Since there is a planned halving at this point, there will already be a significant "shock" caused by the drop in issuance caused by the halving. This reduces surprise and thus increases security. Also, due to the nature of the smoothed curve having a portion of the curve above the respective step function line at times, this will maximally _reduce_ the issuance shock at the `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`.
```

Reviewer 3: IMO, it is worth noting in the ZIP text here that while this height will reduce the drop in issuance vs the halving schedule (so that issuance rate will be more than half of the previous amount) it will lead to lower issuance than the halving schedule at some time in the future (assuming ZSF deposits are not large enough to shift this).

In other words it lessons the shock/disruption in the immediate term and a cost in the future. However that future cost isn't sudden and gradual.

## Constants

Define constants:

“`BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`” = 4126 / 10,000,000,000 or `0.0000004126`

"`DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`" = 2726400

## Issuance Calculation

At the `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`, nodes should switch from the current issuance calculation, to the following:

Given the block height `h` define a function **BlockSubsidy(h)**, such that:

**BlockSubsidy(h)** = Block subsidy for a given `h`, that satisfies above requirements.

Using an exponential decay function for **BlockSubsidy** satisfies requirements **R1** and **R2** above:

`BlockSubsidy(h) = BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1)`

Finally, to satisfy **R3** above we always round up to the next zatoshi.

`BlockSubsidy(h) = ceiling(BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION * ZsfBalanceAfter(h - 1))`

## Deployment

TBD

# Rationale

## `BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION`

Let `IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears` = 0.5.

The value `4126 / 10_000_000_000` satisfies the approximation within +0.002%:

`(1 - BLOCK_SUBSIDY_FRACTION)^PostBlossomHalvingInterval ≈ IntendedZSFFractionRemainingAfterFourYears`

Meaning after a period of 4 years around half of `ZSF_BALANCE` will be paid out
as block subsidies, thus satisfying **R4**.

> TODO for ZIP owners: How many ZEC per day?

Reviewer 2: @tomekpiotrowski as part of your simulator, it would be helpful to calculate a total block subsidy for the next halving, so we can compare it to the total block subsidy if we didn't make this change.

The ZSF subsidy is the subsidy for the first `1_680_000` (`PostBlossomHalvingInterval`) blocks.
The non-ZSF subsidy is over the same block range, but it is a constant `1.5625` ZEC per block. (This is equal to half the current `3.125` ZEC subsidy per block.)

Optional: It might also be helpful to make `BLOCKS_PER_YEAR` equal to `1_680_000/4` to avoid confusion.

Author: @teor2345 I've updated my simulator code: https://github.com/eigerco/zsf-simulator#output with the comparison of subsidies paid out between halvings. I'll update the ZIP itself soon as well.

The deployment should happen at the next halving, which is block `2726400`.

Since there is a planned halving at this point, there will already be a significant "shock" caused by the drop in issuance caused by the halving. This reduces surprise and thus increases security. Also, due to the nature of the smoothed curve having a portion of the curve above the respective step function line at times, this will maximally _reduce_ the issuance shock at the `DEPLOYMENT_BLOCK_HEIGHT`.

## Visualization of the Smoothed Curve

The following graph, taken from the ECC blog post, illustrates the smoothed curve. Note that depending on when the network upgrade takes place the disbursement may temporarily _increase_.

![A graph showing a comparison of the halving-based step function vs the smoothed curve](./draft-zip-smoothed-issuance-curve.png)

[TODO: We should update this graph now showing the deployment at `2726400`]

# Appendix: Simulation

We encourage readers to run the following Rust code, which simulates block subsidies.
According to this simulation, assuming no deflationary action, block subsidies would
last for approximately 113 years:

## Rust Code

```rust

> const BLOCKS_PER_YEAR: u32 = 420_768;

Reviewer 2: Let's replace this with a link to the simulator, so people always see the latest code?

## Visualization of the Smoothed Curve

The following graph illustrates compares issuance for the current halving-based step function vs the smoothed curve.

![A graph showing a comparison of the halving-based step function vs the smoothed curve](./zsf_block_subsidy.png)

The graph below shows the balance of the ZSF assuming smooth issuance is implemented.

![A graph showing the balance of the ZSF assuming smooth issuance is implemented](./zsf_balance.png)

# Appendix: Simulation

The [ZSF simulator](https://github.com/eigerco/zsf-simulator) allows us to simulate the effects of this ZIP on the ZSF balance and the block subsidy, as well as generate plots like the one above. It's output:

```
Last block is 47917869 in ~113.88 years
```

indicates that, assuming no ZEC is ever deposited to the ZSF, its balance will be depleted after 113.88 years, and the block subsidy will be 0 ZEC after that point.

This fragment of the output 

```
Halving  1 at block  1680000:

>   ZSF subsidies:    262523884819889 (~2625238 ZEC)

Reviewer 2: Can you add an "average ZEC per block" to this line?

Author: done

  legacy subsidies: 262500000000000 (~2625000 ZEC) (1.56250000 ZEC per block)
  difference:           23884819889 (~    238 ZEC), ZSF/legacy: 1.0001
```

> shows that the difference between the smoothed out and the current issuance schemes is 238 ZEC after 1680000 blocks (aroound 4 years).

Reviewer 2: Thank you, I really appreciate this analysis. So the extra issuance is around 0.16 ZEC per day, or 0.00014 ZEC per block. That seems reasonable!
